---
layout: post
title: Black Lamb and Grey Falcon
---

I'm not quite a quarter of the way through Rebecca West's monumental travelogue
of pre-World War II Yugoslavia. It's wonderful stuff, and there's seems to be a
quotable passage on just about every page. I started it while on a trip, which
seemed appropriate. Christopher Hitchens wrote the forward this edition, and
while I usually skip long introductions, this one was very much worth reading
and I'm glad I stuck through it. It's easy to forget what a formidable writer he
was.

Things have been very busy around here lately - lots and lots of things
happening to fall on the onset of summer. Retreating into book and study has
been a blessed relief. The vegetable garden is off to a good start and I hope to
do a little antenna construction in another couple of weeks when (ho, ho) things
calm down a bit. Not sure what book(s) will be going into the on-deck circle. 

I heard an interesting review the other day of the late Tony Horwitz's _Spying
on the South_, and may add that. Just seems like a travelogue sort of season.
I'm also pursuing catechetical certification from our diocese, by way of
completing a series of online training modules. I recently completed the first
lesson of the first module and can now use _homoosious_ correctly in a sentence. 

Speaking of mysteries, I've been in pursuit of a minor one concerning some
utility lines which cross our property. We live on about 5 acres of land and
there are a couple of old poles carrying lines on to (and off of) the property
into parts unknown. Vines are beginning to completely consume one pole and I was
a little hesitant about cutting them myself, owing to a profound respect for
high voltage. My wife suggested we ask the local power company to take care of
it so we called them and they sent a man out. He looked at the poles and
declared two things. First, the lines were almost certainly not carrying power.
Second, they did not belong to our local utility. I called our county planning
office, and they sent me to the register of deeds, who in turn suggested I come
by to look through property records. Someone along the line would have granted
an easement to someone else for the poles and I'd need to find the transaction
by hand.

On a whim (well not quite a whim - the local utility guy suggested it), I
contacted the TVA and they responded nearly immediately. The easement was
theirs, and they moreover sent me an image of a document dating from 1920
showing the transaction, signed by the person who owned all this land at the
time. Now I'm conflicted. On the one hand, I am tempted to petition the TVA to
abandon the easement,  or the piece of it that crosses my yard at the very
least. On the other hand, disappearing back into obscurity _also_ has its appeal
and the last thing I want to do is stir up some big institutional machine into
deciding that, hey, this easement is actually pretty cool and we were just
thinking about re-energizing everything along there. In any case, a couple of
semi-abandoned poles have some interesting HAM RADIO potential, as long as no
one's going to through a switch at some point in the future.
