---
layout: post
title: Symbol or Substance?
---

A friend of mine loaned me a copy of Peter Kreeft's _Symbol or Sustance: A
Dialogue on the Eucharist_ which posits an imaginary dialogue between C.S.
Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, and Billy Graham, discussing the Real Presence from their
respective traditions. I'm always a little suspicious of imaginary dialogues
from real people, but I thought Kreeft did a good job preserving the individual
voices without sliding into wish-fulfillment. Kreeft, a Catholic, deeply
respects the integrity of the three positions. As he states in the introduction,
this is the only way it could work without turning one or more of the characters
into caricatures. The book contains a few occasions of Lewis and Tolkien reading
from their notes and papers, including this bit from Lewis' _The Weight of Glory_:

>It is a serious thing to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, to
remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you talk to may one day
be a creature which, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to
worship or else a horror and a corruption such as you now meet, if at all, only
in a nightmare. All day long we are, in some degree, helping each other to one
or other of these destinations. It is in the light of these overwhelming
possibilities, it is with awe and circumspection proper to them, that we should
conduct all our dealings with one another, all friendships, all loves, all
play, all politics. There are no _ordinary_ people. You have never talked to a
mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilization --- these are mortal, and
their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. But it is immortals whom we joke
with, marry, snub, and exploit --- immortal horrors or everlasting splendours.
This does not mean we are perpetually solemn. We must play. But out merriment
must be of that kind (and it is, in fact, the merriest kind) which exists
between people who have, from the outset, taken each other seriously --- no
flippancy, no superiority, no presumption. And our charity must be a real and
costly love, with deep feeling for the sins in spite of which we love the
sinner --- no mere tolerance or indulgence which parodies love as flippancy
parodies merriment. Next to the Blessed Sacrament itself, your neighbor is the
holiest object presented to your senses. If he is your Christian neighbor he is
holy in almost the same way, for in him also Christ _vere latitat_ --- the
glorifier and the glorified, Glory Himself, is truly hidden.

Today will be a double-post sort of day. I came across a section in _Jesus of
Nazareth_ on the second Beatitude and want to spend some more time ruminating on
it. 
