---
layout: post
title: Patristic typology
---

In the home-stretch of Daniélou's _From Shadows to Reality_, a series
of studies in the main threads of early patristic typology: swirling
threads of thought which diverge and rejoin in understanding of the
Old Testament. I have to confess that the material is a bit drier than
I expected (if you can believe that). Much of it is "so-and-so wrote this,
so-and-so affirmed it, but so-and-so's _Homily on Foofooius_ draws from
Philo..." and again I'm not really sure what I was expecting. The book
is exactly as described on the cover: studies in the typology of the 
fathers. I read one of his other books on sacramental typology (_The
Bible and the Liturgy_) and thought it was a bit more engaging. In any 
case, I can see coming back to this for consultation now and again. It's 
a near-certainty to me that reliance on historical-critical exegesis 
leaves something of a void that a return to the fathers can fill. From
the introduction:

>Few things are more disconcerting for the modern man than the 
Scriptural commentaries of the Fathers of the Church. On the one hand
there is a fullness, both theological and spiritual which gives them
a richness unequalled elsewhere. But at the same time modern man feels
a stranger to their outlook and they cut clean through his modes of
thought. Hence the depreciation, so common, of Patristic exegesis, which 
in varying degrees is felt among so many of our contemporaries. We cannot
help feeling that this suspicion is due to the fact that, in all the works
of the Golden Age of the Fathers, we find side by side the most divergent
interpretations, in which good an dbad are inextricably mixed. The problem
is how to find one's way in this new world. If Origen speaks of the
"vast forest of the Scriptures," how much more true is this of the 
luxuriant commentaries which have grown up around the Scriptures.

I just started the section on the Joshua cycle, and it looks a bit more
interesting. We'll see. 

In other news, we just started _Chernobyl_. I believe I'd watch a miniseries
of Jared Harris just working crossword puzzles and putzing around in his kitchen.
