---
layout: post
title: Thomistic Christology
---

>Because God is not wholly alien to human thought and freedom, therefore the
freedom of Christ can find its authentic fulfillment, perfection, and beauty in
being utterly relative to God, that is to say, in knowing and doing the will of
the Father. Through the medium of his human reason illumined by grace, Christ as
man has knowledge of his own divine will that he shares with the Father, and this
in turn renders him humanly free to do the divine will. Were there an absolute
ontological dissimilitude between the human nature of Christ and divine nature,
there would simply be no possibility of a cooperation of the human will of
Christ with the divine will, as the revelation of the will of the Father would
remain wholly alien and unintelligible to Christ's human nature, even in the
presence of divine grace. In point of fact, however, Christ's human knowledge of
his own deity deepens his human freedom by augmenting his human potential to
love and to choose what is authentically good with freedom. In this way it is
the source of the unique freedom of Christ.  
--- Thomas Joseph White, OP, _The Incarnate Lord_

This book was a bit of slow going at first - the initial parts of it respond to
to other works of theology that I only know by name, though it didn't take look
to suss out the main ideas by way of White's _sed contras_. I haven't had to
read that carefully and slowly in a long time, and I can see returning to this
frequently in the future. 

Why study Christology? Well, if we believe that God became Man, it's very much
worthwhile thinking through that teaches us about Him, especially as regards His
death and resurrection. White shows how to bring to bear the theology of Thomas
Aquinas to bear on some of the modern lines of thought about Christ, resolving
some of the issues that have clouded an already demanding topic. At best, this
cloudiness results in confusion; at worst, thoughts which slowly edge
in the direction of Nestorianism or even Gnosticism. For my part, the sections
on Holy Saturday cleared away some confusion I've had since trying to tackle
Balthasar's _Mysterium Paschale_ (which he engages directly). Strangely enough,
the descent into hell is something we gloss right over in the creeds but gets
called out frequently by adults in our RCIA classes. _Wait, what does THAT mean?
He descended into hell?_ They've never heard it before, which surprises me. 
