---
layout: post
title: Maturity
---
>Maturity comes only when confronting what has to be confronted within
ourselves. This is where the vows relate, and illuminate each other. For
stability means that I must not run away from where my battles are being fought,
that I have to stand still where the real issues have to be faced. Obedience
compels me to re-enact in my own life that submission of Christ himself, even
though it may lead to suffering and to death. And _conversatio_, openness, means
that I must be ready to pick myself up, and start all over again in a pattern of
growth which will not end until the day of my final dying. And all the time the
journey is based on that Gospel paradox of losing life and finding it. An
anxious attitude with my personal and spiritual growth is disastrous. The goal
of my changing life is not self-fulfilment, even though so much of the personal
growth movement popular today seems to suggest that that is so. St Benedict is
quite ruthless about the sort of self-fulfilment which is self-seeking. My goal
is Christ.  
-- Esther de Waal, _Seeking God: The Way of St. Benedict_

He must increase; I must decrease.  You wish to serve - very well then. What if
it is His will that you serve by waiting? By turning silence into a joyful
communion of thanks and praise? Perhaps this is all there is, and all there will
ever be. Or not. But here, now, in this moment, surrounded by these people - how
will I conform myself to Him? Elsewhere, de Waal quotes Metropolitan Bloom, to
the effect that if I cannot find Him here and now, I will not find Him anwhere,
perhaps not even in the Temple. Am I growing in holiness? Or erecting roadblocks
based on the way I think things _ought_ to be?
