---
layout: post
title: Origen   
---

The Office of Readings today included a portion of a homily by Origen on
Leviticus. At Mass yesterday, the Gospel for the second scrutiny was read: the
story of the man born blind. Eyes, seeing, and light are - not surprisingly -
taking center stage as we build up to Easter. Eyes have been on my mind lately
quite a bit as well: I'm dealing with a pernicious and annoying problem in one
eye that has sorely tested my wherewithal for patient suffering.

>There is a deeper meaning in the fact that the high  priest sprinkles the blood towards the east. Atonement comes to you  from   
the east. From the east comes the one whose name is Dayspring,  he who is mediator between God and men. You are invited then  to   
look always to the east: it  is there that the sun of  righteousness rises for you, it is  there that the light is always  being   
born for you. You are never to walk in darkness; the great and final day is not to enfold you in darkness. Do not let the  night   
and mist of ignorance steal upon you. So that you may always enjoy the light of knowledge, keep always in the daylight of faith,   
hold fast always to the light of love and peace.

Added to my reading stack: _Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs_,
thanks to slowly growing interest in Lisp. I've also been looking at _Common Lisp: A 
Gentle Introduction to Symbolic Computation_ and working through a few
tutorials. I am not likely to make a mid-career change to Lisp developer, but I
am thoroughly enjoying _thinking_ about computers and programs a bit
differently. Quite a bit differently, actually. Just as a purely mental exercise
it's been worth the effort so far. If I could just get used to emacs keybindings
now...

In other, semi-related tech news: I tweaked my at-home Linux setup to use the i3
tiling window manager. So far so good. Having to break a few habits related to
xfce's workspace switching, but otherwise I think it's going well. Some radio
apps aren't particularly well-suited to tiling, or I haven't figured out how to
make them so. There's always _float_ mode, I suppose.
