---
layout: post
title: Be Local
---
I've kicked Twitter to the curb for the most part. I deactivated my main
presence there and set up a new one which follows exactly 30 accounts in my
local area which focus on severe weather, emergency response, or public
information on the same. When bad weather rolls in (as it did last night and
will again this weekend), I'll turn it on to read (and contribute) weather
spotting information as needed. The only other thing I was using it for was
DM'ing my brother, and we've since moved to SMS. To the curb, then. Or halfway
to the curb anyhow. The mobile app still has way too many sponsored posts. If
I'm sitting at my desk, though, I can use
[oystyyer](https://github.com/oysttyer/oysttyer) to keep an ad-free, 100% text
experience. 

As for the rest: I'm trying (with variable success) to limit my Reddit intake to
the amateur radio-related sub(s). I switch between newsbeuter and liferea for
RSS feed-reading. I use Firefox as my main browser, and have installed uBlock
Origin and Privacy Badger. For many things, elinks still works fine.  I also run 
a pi-hole on our local network.

Much of this -- including renewing subscriptions to the two (!) local newspapers
-- has been part of a slowly growing focus on the _local_; that which is still
arguably within our ken. I was for a long time "engaged" with way too many
things. I know many people who still are, but can't tell you what the city
council decided last night about the big road projects or annexations, both of
which have arguably more immediate impact on day-to-day life than a policy fight
in Washington. This goes equally for church politics, by the way. The latest
pronouncements in Rome are interesting and certainly deserving of attention, but
certainly not _more_ attention than the goings-on at our local parish (or
diocese). This sounds like a suggestion for complete withdrawal from issues
beyond the county line. I'm not sure that's possible, or even desirable.
Recalibrating how much attention is paid or calories burnt in response _is_
possible and worth a go.

And this is all very Benedictine - the focus on the particular people in the
particular place you find yourself. Even beyond the walls of the monastery, we
can strive for
[_stabilio_](https://blog.adw.org/2012/07/a-reflection-on-the-benedictine-vow-of-stability/).
In the face of the "engagement" colossus of the connected "social" world, we can't 
focus long enough on our own feet. The world longs to see us uprooted -
physically, mentally, spiritually. 
