---
layout: post
title: Symbol or Substance?
---

_Jesus of Nazareth_, a personal meditation by Pope Benedict XVI on the person of
Christ, focuses on the portion of Jesus' public life from His baptism in the
Jordan to the Transfiguration. The little book is dense, which ought to come as
no surprise given Benedict's extensive academic background. I say this to say
that it's slow going. 

Proceeding through the Sermon on the Mount, the Holy Father offered this
meditation on the second Beatitude:

> Let us go back to the second Beatitude: "Blessed are those who mourn, for they
shall be comforted" (Mt 5:4). Is it good to mourn and declare mourning blessed?
There are two kinds of mourning. The first is the kind that has lost hope, that
has become mistrustful of love and truth, and that therefore eats away and
destroys man from within. But there is also the mourning occasioned by a
shattering encounter with the truth, which leads man to undergo conversion and
to resist evil. This mourning heals, because it teaches man to hope and to love
again. Judas is an example of the first kind of mourning: Struck with horror at
his own fall, he no longer dares to hope and hangs himself in despair. Peter is
an example of the second kind: Struck by the Lord's gaze, he bursts into healing
tears that plow up the soil of his soul. He begins anew and is himself renewed.

Some time ago, I was talking to a priest about confession, and one of the things
that I told him was that I was having a bit of trouble with the examination of
conscience forms that you find online in various places. They generally follow
the Ten Commandments, and frankly I found myself having a difficult time finding
myself in them. On the other hand, I couldn't for a moment believe that I'd
spent the weeks since my _last_ confession in a state of complete perfection. Oh
sure, there was the usual collection of venial sins, but what could I go to
re-frame self-examination? He suggested that I begin looking to the Beatitudes.
This turned out to be really good advice, for where the Decalogue is pretty
cut-and-dried ("Do not kill," even allowing for all of those things that stop
short of actual murder but nevertheless gravely harm the spirit of another), the
Beatitudes force the reader to put himself into the place of, for example, a
peacemaker. What would the blessed peacemaker look like? How would he react in
this particular situation, or how would he respond conflicts large and small?
And, then: was this me? Did I live this out? What action, stillness, word, or
silence did I _omit_, thus falling short? We first have to dare to imagine what
the blessed look like. Well not _entirely_ imagine - the example stands before
us in the person of Christ. We have to imagine a hunger and thirst for
righteousness, see ourselves hungering and thirsting for the righteousness of
the kingdom and all that entails. Then and only then are we animated to act and
speak, or more importantly, remain still and silent. 
