---
layout: Going to the Dead
title: 
---

Having pruned my Twitter list back to what I consider the bare essentials
(namely: friends, other hams, a few religion writers, and local
groups/organizations/entities), I've been rediscovering the joy of RSS feeds. I
was a hardcore Google Reader user until its unfortunate demise, then switched to
Feedly. At some point I stopped using it, but my account was still there, so I
purged and rebuilt all the feeds and now check it about twice a day for news
updates and all the goings-on. It was a nice surprise that most of my favorite
sites still offer RSS feeds, though it occasionally took a little bit of
right-click+view-source to find them. Only two sites remain - _Garden & Gun_ and
_The Nashville Scene_ but I haven't given up yet.

We had a perfectly lovely Easter weekend, and managed to make all of the
liturgies of the Triduum: Holy Thursday, Good Friday, and the Easter Vigil. I
was privileged to sponsor a young woman who was confirmed and received her first
Holy Communion. It was wonderful to see such a large cohort, both candidates and
catechumens, received into the Church. Being involved with RCIA has been a
blessing these past few months such that I've decided to pursue catechetical
certification in our diocese. There's an option for online learning that would
fit well with my schedule and I'm pretty sure I could complete
it well under the three allotted years. 

I picked up _Mysterium Paschale_ again over the weekend to revisit von
Balthasar's exploration of Holy Saturday.

bq.The more eloquently the Gospels describe the passion of the living Jesus, his
death and burial, the more striking is their entirely understandable silence
when it comes to the time in between his placing in the grave and the event of
the Resurrection. We are grateful to them for this. Death calls for this
silence, not only by reason of the mourning of the survivors but, even more,
because of what we know of the dwelling and condition of the dead. When we
ascribe to the dead forms of activity that are new and yet prolong those of
earth, we are not simply expressing our perplexity. We are also defending
ourselves against a stronger conviction which tells us that death is not a
partial event. It is a happening which affects the whole person, though not
necessarily to the point of obliterating the human subject altogether. It is a
situation which signifies in the first place the abandonment of all spontaneous
activity and so a passivity, a state in which, perhaps, the vital activity now
brought to its end is mysteriously summed up.

It is in death, as the introduction to this book points out, that we find
Christ's most radical solidarity with us. Even so, it feels like Holy Saturday
almost gets lost in the shuffle. One moment we're celebrating the institution of
the Eucharist on Holy Thursday. The next night we're revisiting His Passion and
venerating the wood of the cross. Saturday comes and all eyes look to the west
and the setting sun which marks the beginning of the Easter Vigil. We might
pause on Saturday morning to feel the stillness of the earth in the pause
between pauses. Everything holds its breath waiting for death itself to start
working backwards, as Aslan explained to the children. 

On the strength of [Alan Jacobs'
recommendation](https://www.theamericanconservative.com/jacobs/on-black-lamb-and-grey-falcon/), I'm adding _Black Lamb and Grey
Falcon_ by Rebecca West to the book pile. He mentioned it again recently in a
[blog post, too](https://blog.ayjay.org/lord-make-me-an-idiot/). 
