---
layout: post
title: Thoughts
---

Our technologies have specific ends to which they are ordered. What are they?
Are there multiple ends? Those ends for which we use them, but a deeper (or
higher?) level, their actual ends, as intended by their creators?

Technology doesn't exist for its own sake. As there was a creator, there is also
a _telos_.

In the sphere of unlimited, instantaneous global communication and attention,
how have our views of ourselves (and by extension, others) been changed for the
better or worse? How does the TOB inform this thinking? I'm thinking in
particular of authentic, in-person communications and our relationships with
enfleshed others.

What if Alison Parrish's thoughts on a new hacker ethic were to obtain
completely? What if they were reinforced by the thoughts in _Weapons of Math
Destruction_, in particular, the growing recognition that humans are not nearly
as good at algorithms as we think we are? And that this recognition may not be
keeping pace with their widespread implementation? And that this widespread
implementation has real, grave impacts? If fully internalized by technicians,
how would the technology landscape be different?

If we count the cost, who pays the steepest prices? What does a _preferential
option for the poor_ look like in a globally connected world?

As the world prior to the Internet continues to recede, and the second generation to swim
completely in it grows up, what new criticism will be levied? As a cohort, where
will they stand fast? 
