---
layout: post
title: chmod 0444 twitter   
---

Twitter has pretty much been my only social media presence for some time now,
though I consume way more than I contribute. I tend to follow three groups of
accounts:

1. Friends (including other hams) and people/organizations that are locally
   rooted in my city, county, and state. This is my main feed and numbers about
   200 different accounts. 
2. A list of news organizations called "breaking," which I usually turn on when
   Something Big is going on.
3. A list of religion writers/leaders from across the spectrum: Catholic,
   Protestant, Orthodox, Jewish, Muslim. 

I used to have a list strictly dedicated to industry-related things but got tired of
the infighting and ego-stroking. I dropped Facebook some time ago. I do have an
Instagram account, but only follow family members. So, to be fair, it's not like
a had a large social footprint to start with. Even so, laying Twitter aside for
several weeks has had an interesting effect. Without putting too fine a point on
it: I can think longer and more clearly about things. I dipped back into the
religion list for a little while the other day and couldn't shut it down fast
enough and, mind you, it's not as though there's much in the way of acrimony.
It's just so _much_. So after Lent, I've decided to pare back my usage to my
main timeline and boot the other lists. If Something Big happens, I will
certainly find out about it via other means. My account will remain private and
I'll probably continue using it in something of a read-only mode. The two
exceptions will be severe weather spotting (our local NWS office monitors for a
particular hashtag) and PM'ing my brother. That's about it.

[This
post at GetReligion](https://www.getreligion.org/getreligion/2019/4/5/is-this-a-news-story-its-a-new-challenge-for-pastors-a-smartphone-that-just-wont-leave-them-alone) really drove the point home for me, and not because I'm a pastor. I am not. I've concluded that while, yes, social media has done some good things it is on balance not a net good for us. Not personally, not at a community level. And certainly not as a media with an underlying profit motive that requires constant engagement via the constant stimulation of primal urges. Tmatt goes into more detail in [his weekly column, which is also well worth reading](https://www.ukiahdailyjournal.com/2019/04/05/on-religion-busy-pastors-and-the-dumpster-fire-of-social-media/)

Don't get me wrong. I love the Internet, mostly because it's still possible for
me to use it the way I always have - as a means to an end rather than an end in
itself. It's still imminently possible to research, learn, and communicate with
tools that let _me_ control what I'm seeing and how much I share. It takes some
work, to be sure, and it ought not, but this is the way it is for now. 

So books: still on _Jesus of Nazareth_. Finished up _The Culture Code_, which
was a little better than I expected. Not sure what I'll go to next. Itching for
some fiction, but not sure what.
