---
layout: post
title: New year, new books
---

Christmas is done, Epiphany is finished and here I am with a stack of new books:
_Doors in the Walls of the World_ by Peter Kreeft, _The Golden Rhinoceros_ by
FranÃ§ois-Xavier Fauvelle, _The Rule of Benedict_ by Georg Holzherr OSB, and a
guide to gardening with local Tennessee plants. I'm still slowly working my way
through Tanquerey's _Spiritual Life_, which I'm liking very much. I used parts
of it for a recent RCIA lesson on sin and temptationm, in particular the
explanations of the threefold concupiscence. I've just started the section on
the capital sins - also very engaging stuff.

I like Kreeft's books. This one feels like it could have been a transcript of a
lecture - very conversational and approachable. There are moments where his
enthusiasm is nearly too much, that maybe the printed word is just barely enough
to hold him still. Reading him is like having a couple of beers with a friend
who just happens to be on fire and can't wait to ignite you as well. But in a
good way of course.

I had another meeting with the director of vocations yesterday. The process
continues, and I left with another book recommendation: _The Noonday Devil_ by
Dom Jean-Charles Nault, OSB. This is an exploration and study of acedia, more
commonly known as sloth, one of the seven capital sins. From the dust-jacket
blurb:

>The word "sloth", however, can be misleading for acedia is not laziness; in
fact it can manifest itself as business or activism. Rather, acedia is a gloomy
combination of weariness, sadness, and lack of purposefulness. It robs a person
of his capacity for joy and leaves him feeling empty, or void of meaning.

_The Noonday Devil_ will be going with me next week as I head to a weekend men's
retreat.
