---
layout: post
title:  June Update 
---
I just finished Paul Elie's _The Life You Save May Be Your Own_, which traces
the respective biographies of Flannery O'Connor, Thomas Merton, Dorothy Day, and
Walker Percy into a beautiful and engaging story of a particular moment in
American Catholicism. Merton and Day's stories I already knew, having read _The
Seven Storey Mountain_ and _The Long Loneliness_ some time ago. O'Connor I knew
from studying Southern Lit in college and working my way through her complete
short stories, collected letters (_Habit of Being_, published posthumously), and
_Wise Blood_. Percy I knew only sort of obliquely. I read _The Thanatos
Symdrome_ in high school or maybe college, intrigued by the general plot but
missing buy a country mile any sort of religious threads. I should probably  
add it to the on-deck list along with _Love In The Ruins_.

As it is, I've got _The Violent Bear It Away_ and the selected writings of St.
Bernard of Clairvaux on the way. Also a guide on identifying wild edible plants,
which has become sort of interest of mine recently. Off the top of my head, I
can think of the following things growing in and around our yard which are said
to be edible if not actually tasty: prickly pear cactus, red mulberry,
blackberries, American persimmons (male trees which will not fruit),
Passionflower vines, elderberries, and (if you can get them before every bird)
black cherries. There's plenty of wood sorrel and I'd wager purslane somewhere
if I knew what it looked like.

I woke up with some terrible stomach cramps today. They seem to be on the way
out, but it's telling that in trying to figure out their cause, my wife looked
at me archly and asked whether or not I had eaten anything I'd had found in the
yard. The answer was no, if you were wondering.  

So - we've had a fair amount of rain lately and the gardens are growing like
crazy. The peppers look very promising and, _mirabilis dictu_, we're keeping up
with the zucchini production. I've been meaning to get some pumpkin hills
planted so that we might have pumpkins by October. Maybe over the holiday
weekend. As it is, we'll be well-supplied with weird gourds. Several from last
year were thrown into the compost heap and they've grown like Audrey III. I
don't think we can eat them or do anything but look at them, but they're growing
so well I don't have the heart to pull them up.  

RCIA-wise, I have taken over the neophyte year meetings, which we've been doing
over Zoom. We do them monthly; the next session is coming up and I need to start
preparing for a discussion on prayer.
