---
layout: post
title:  The Life You Save 
---
I recently 'attended' an online symposium marking the fifth anniversary of Pope
Francis' _Laudato Si_. I wasn't really sure what to expect, but I enjoyed the
discussion and would definitely watch more of that sort of thing in the future.
Zoom-fatigue notwithstanding, registration and attendance were basically
frictionless. I watched it on the back porch. It doesn't get a whole lot easier
than that.

One of the speakers was author Paul Elie, and somehow his book _The Life You
Save May Be Your Own_ came up. I can't recall if it was mentioned, or if I saw
it while pulling up other links during the discussion. In any event, I was
intrigued: here was a book featuring Flannery O'Connor, Thomas Merton, Dorothy
Day, and Walker Percy. How on earth was it possible that I hadn't heard of it?
Straight to the one-click-order screen. I had intended to wait until finishing
_The Dialogue_ but the weather was so nice on Memorial Day that I simply
couldn't resist. So far it's wonderful. Elie weaves the stories of these four
together into a sort of larger story of pilgrimage, of Catholicism with a
peculiarly American savor. Among other things, it's made me want to read more of
Percy's work. I read _The Thanatos Syndrome_ years and years ago, but only
remember bits and pieces of it.  

Public celebration of Mass has resumed here, and we were able to receive several
of our RCIA students last Sunday, God be praised. A few more will be received
this weekend. After that we'll start semi-regular (online) meetings for their
neophyte year. This will be my particular focus and I've been putting some
thoughts together on topics for presentation and discussion. My hope and intent
is for these sessions to be more about praxis - the active life animated by
faith and belief - rather than a guided tour of neato Catholic tidbits or a
collection of stuff we never got to during Lent. Things like the
methods and reasons for prayer, the colossal treasury of devotions, where to
find answers, realizing a vocation, the interior life and so on. "Further up and
further in," as they said in _The Last Battle_. It's a lot to bite off, but then
again there's no lack of time and space. The timing is good for something like
this.


