---
layout: post
title: Rediscovering acedia
---

The retreat was good. As usual, I went expecting one thing and left with
something different. The conferences were interesting, in no small part because
priest who led them was something like six-foot-six, friendly, personable, and
full of stories. There were numerous opportunities for prayer, Mass, Adoration,
and the like. Plenty of silence, and the sisters who manage the retreat house
do a wonderful job of keeping the retreatants fat and happy. It was also good to
meet the others - some of whom I had met last year - and catch up on things. I
found myself answering a fair number of questions about homeschooling, parenting
teenagers through the college experience, and the like. Some of the men were
considering things we did about ten years ago, so they were keen to hear how
things had turned out, and what sorts of insights I had to offer. I'm not going
to lie; it was a little weird.

I started _The Noonday Devil_ while on retreat and am very much enjoying it. You
wouldn't think that a book about a capital sin would be all that,  but it is.
Acedia was known to the Desert Fathers and described in detail by Evagrius of
Pontus, a fourth century theologian. Monks living a solitary existence would
come into periods of dryness and weariness, rendering prayer difficult or
impossible. In some cases this was accompanied by torpor, in others, a sort of
frantic business. As time passed, acedia sort of fell off the radar in favor of
sloth, which took its place in the lists but calls to mind general laziness and
losing something of its depth. St. Thomas Aquinas briefly wrote about it,
describing it as a sin against the love of charity, and points to an ingenius
remedy: The Incarnation itself! Go read it to see how. Ultimately, William of
Ockham may have been responsible for acedia's place on the back-burner. By
reducing events and actions to individual, separated occurrences, sundered from
a larger pattern or totality, the need to describe a broad tendency
(like acedia) is diminished.

Fortunately, acedia's made something of comeback in the popular consciousness.
Unfortunately, it never realyl left us. _The Noonday Devil_ traces the notion of
acedia through church history, starting with Evagrius and the others, through
the middle ages, and into modernity. The Fathers were wise - the concept of
acedia is no less relevant today than it was in a desert cell 1,600 years ago.
Consider the mid-life crisis, or the pervasive nihilism, or the constant desire
for novelty as its own end. I'm not quite finished, but can see that I'll certainly be
returning to it, especially the section I'm in now, which not only describes
modern acedia, but goes on to describe the remedies.
